---
title: "New Fellows"
layout: post
author: "Joshua K. Farrar"
categories: opinion
---

I have had the opportunity recently to meet the latest cohort of [Presidential Innovation Fellows](https://pif.gov). I am pleased to see that the General Services Administration staffers who ably run the program continue to learn from the experiences, both positive and negative, of past cohorts. It is my observation that they continue to excel in the selection not only of candidates who are real geniuses in the fields of technology and project management, but who understand that their role as change agents frequently depends upon their ability to quickly learn the byzantine process of government budgeting and acquisitions in order to help the government refine its medium-range plans, in this case 3-5 years.

New Fellows are also sometimes like unworked steel: in every cohort there are the simple unexamined assumptions and varying levels of understanding about government processes, but also biases that have gone unnoticed, reasoning failures, misconceptions, and errors of all sorts. This is OK, so long as no laws are broken. Very few, save, perhaps, those brought up in federal families, show up at the door of a federal agency for the first time with the full comprehension of how their work will change them. Marshall Goldsmith said, "what got you here won't get you there." In my own time as a fellow, I discovered that as an engineer my principal strengths, of writing code, reviewing the code of others, of organizing the labor of other engineers, and designing software systems to solve business problems that, ostensibly, also solve human ones, were little match for the machinery of government. You can have great ideas that will likely do what you expect with whatever metrics you've been tasked to increase or decrease, but in government a good idea without a budget is like an engine without gasoline. Both go nowhere quickly, even if you can, in theory, design and ship a software product with the skills available on your team.

Therefore, it is imperative that reasonable expectations be set, and hiring based on skills alignment that transcends merely the technical. And it is good to see that this is, indeed, occurring. New Fellows I have spoken with appear to understand, without too much prompting, that their goal is, in some respect, to accomplish all that they are able to address their agency's reason for seeking out their expertise. Furthermore, it appears clear that this may result in their work being organized specifically so that government processes they are able to activate are able to ensure their efforts continue beyond their fellowship, even without them. Anecdotally, I do not hear of much thrashing against the system before quickly burning out. Given that, by most outward appearances, Fellows appear well-prepared for the year or years ahead of them, it could be said, I hope, that the program is in a good place.

With respect to what I shall delicately refer to as "those other quirks": government in general is at least capable of working those out too, with time and repeated exposure to policy. At least, the behaviors generally appear to work out as such. I've not seen actual burnouts among high-skilled, high-ranking staffers, so much as many minor corrections in the face of pro-social expectation-setting and social pressure. This isn't to say I haven't seen burnout, nor other behavior problems, elsewhere among the many compartments and machines of the apparatus. Like any large human enterprise the government surely also encounters those with obstinate adverse decision-making frameworks, deeply socially programmed yet poorly understood biases, and human mental health concerns to speak only of so-called "human capital inputs." Here too the program appears to be in a good place.

This is all I believe I have to say of value, at present. Articulating my experiences in government service, particularly in public forums, presents significant challenges due to the sensitive nature of the work. The problems we worked to address at VA, harassment, discrimination, and violence, are deeply embedded in human behavioral biology and culture. Behavioral reporting, monitoring, and management are difficult, and politically charged, subjects. I hope to have more to say on these in the future, but this will require careful consideration on my part. I am incredibly excited to see what this latest cohort of Fellows will accomplish.